@node Chapter 1
@chapter Chapter 1

@quotation
The computer is simply an instrument whose music is ideas.
@author Alan Kay
@end quotation

@*

This booklet covers web development using Cuis Smalltalk.
Popular Smalltalk libraries for web development include
Seaside (https://book.seaside.st/book) and Pier (https://www.piercms.com).
Seaside has been ported to work in Pharo and Squeak, but not Cuis.
Pier is a content management system that is compatible with Pharo Smalltalk,
but has not been ported to work with Squeak or Cuis.

@node Pacakges
@section Packages

The only web development package I have found that is compatible with Cuis
is WebClient (https://wiki.squeak.org/squeak/6337 and
https://github.com/Cuis-Smalltalk/Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev/blob/master/Packages/Features/WebClient.pck.st).
This works with Squeak and has been ported to Cuis, but not to Pharo.

This booklet focuses on using WebClient in Cuis
to implement processing and sending HTTP requests.

@node Installing
@section Installing

To get started, open a Workspace, enter `Feature require: 'WebClient'`,
and "Do it".  This adds many classes in the WebClient...Core category including
`WebClient`, `WebRequest`, `WebResponse`, `WebServer`, and `WebSocket`.

@node HTTP Clients
@section HTTP Clients

The `WebClient` class defines class methods that send HTTP requests.
For example:

@smallexample
res := WebClient httpGet: 'https://pokeapi.co/api/v2/pokemon/pikachu'.
@end smallexample

The value of the variable `res` above is a `WebResponse` object.
It has many instance variables including:

- `code` - status code such as 200
- `content` - response body
- `headers` - an `OrderedCollection` of `Association` objects
  that describe the HTTP response headers such as `content-type` with a
  value like `text/html; charset=utf-8` or `application/json; charset=utf-8`
- `protocol` - such as the `String` `HTTP/1.1`
- `status` - such as the `String` `HTTP/1.1 200 OK`
- `url` - the URL to which the request was sent

@node HTTP Servers
@section HTTP Servers

Our server will receive and send objects described using the JSON format.
The JSON library supports this.
To install it, open a Workspace, enter `Feature require: 'JSON'`, and "Do it".

To handle HTTP requests, create a `WebServer` instance
and send it the `listenOn:` message with a port number.
This starts a Smalltalk process called "WebServers's listener process".
To kill it, open a "Process Browser", select the process,
and press cmd-t (Terminate).

Let's walk through the steps to implement and use a web server
that provides an API for performing CRUD operations
on objects that represent dogs.
To keep things simple, we will hold all the data in memory
rather than persisting it to a database.

First, create the class `Dog`:

@smallexample
Object subclass: #Dog
	instanceVariableNames: 'breed name'
	classVariableNames: 'Count'
	poolDictionaries: ''
	category: 'SomeCategory'
@end smallexample   

Next, define the following class method:

@smallexample
name: aName breed: aBreed
	^self new setName: aName breed: aBreed! !
@end smallexample    

Next, define the following instance methods:

@smallexample
setName: aName breed: aBreed
	name := aName.
	breed := aBreed

breed
	^breed

name
	^name
@end smallexample 

Next, create the class `MyWebServer`:

@smallexample
Object subclass: #MyWebServer
	instanceVariableNames: 'dogDict server'
	classVariableNames: ''
	poolDictionaries: ''
	category: 'SomeCategory'
@end smallexample 

Next, define the following instance methods in the class `MyWebServer`:

@smallexample
initialize
	"demonstrates using the WebServer class"
	
	server := WebServer new.
	
	"This looks for files in the Cuis-Smalltalk-Dev-UserFiles directory."
    "TODO: Describe why it is necessary to define a new verion of the browseRequest method."
	server addService: '/public' action:[:req| WebServer browseRequest2: req].
	
	"server addService: '/' action: [ :req | req send200Response: 'Home Page']."
	"server addService: '/hello' action: [ :req | req send200Response: 'Hello World!']."
	
	server addService: '/hello' action: (MessageSend receiver: self selector: #helloWorld:).

	server
		addService: '/dog'
		action: (MessageSend receiver: self selector: #handleDog:)
		methods: #('DELETE' 'GET' 'POST' 'PUT').

	"server addService: '/dog' action: [ :req | self createDog: req ] methods: #('POST')."
	
	"addService: '/dog' action: [ :req | self updateDog: req ] methods: #('PUT');"
	
	"addService: '/dog' action: [ :req | self deleteDog: req ] methods: #('DELETE')"

start
	| dog1 dog2 |
	dog1 := Dog name: 'Comet' breed: 'Whippet'.
	dog2 := Dog name: 'Oscar' breed: 'German Shorthaired Pointer'.
	dogDict := Dictionary newFrom: {
		dog1 id -> dog1.
		dog2 id -> dog2
	}.
	server listenOn: 3000

stop
	server stopListener

helloWorld: req
	
	req send200Response: 'Hello, World!'

element: anAssoc
	"This returns an HTML string.
	The key in the Association must be a kind of String (such as a Symbol).
	The value in the Association can be a primitive value or
	an Array of Associations that represent nested elements."
	
	| content inner tag template |
	
	tag := anAssoc key.
	content := anAssoc value.
	"TODO: Add support for attributes."
	template := '<{1}>{2}</{1}>'.
	(content isKindOf: String)
		ifTrue: [^​ template format: { tag. content } ]
		ifFalse: [
			"Maybe this should raise an exception if (content isKindOf: SequenceableCollection) is false."
			inner := ''.
			content do: [ :item | inner := inner, (self element: item) ].
			^ template format: { tag. inner }
		]

createDog: aRequest
 	| dog res |
	
	"Get Dog object from request body. An id will be assigned."
	dog := Dog fromJson: aRequest stream.
	
	"Save the new dog."
	dogDict at: dog id put: dog.
	
	"Return the new dog as JSON."
	res := WebResponse protocol: aRequest protocol code: 201. "Created"
	res headerAt: 'Content-Type' put: 'application/json; charset=utf-8'.
	^ aRequest sendResponse: res content: (Json render: dog)

deleteDog: aRequest id: id
	"Delete the dog, verifying that a dog with the given id exists."
	dogDict removeKey: id ifAbsent: [
		^ aRequest send404Response.
	].

	"Return an empty response."
	^ aRequest send200Response: ''

getDogsAsHtml: aRequest
	| css html tableRows |
	css := '
		body { font-family: sans-serif }
		table { border-collapse: collapse }
		td, th {
			border: 1px solid gray;
			padding: 0.5rem;
		}
		th {
			background-color: pink;
		}
	'.
	
	tableRows := OrderedCollection new.
	tableRows add: #tr -> { #th -> 'Name'. #th -> 'Breed' }.
	dogDict do: [ :dog |
        tableRows add: (#tr -> { #td -> dog name. #td -> dog breed })
    ].
	
	html := self element: (#html -> {
		#head -> {
			#title -> 'My Dogs'.
			#style -> css
		}.
		#body -> {
			#h1 -> 'My Dogs'.
			#table -> tableRows
		}
	}).
		
	aRequest send200Response: html contentType: 'text/html'

getDogsAsJson: aRequest
	| json |
	
	"Create a JSON array from the dog Dictionary."
	json := Json render: dogDict asArray.
	
	"Return the JSON."
	aRequest send200Response: json contentType: 'application/json; charset=utf-8'
	
handleDog: aRequest	
	"handle an HTTP request based on its method"
	
	| id method |
	
	method := aRequest method.
	
	(#('DELETE' 'PUT') includes: method) ifTrue: [
		"Get the path parameter value."
		"TODO: Is this really the best way to do it?"
		| parts |
		parts := aRequest url prefixAndSuffix: $/.
		id := [parts last asNumber] on: Error do: [ :e |
			| res |
			res := WebResponse protocol: aRequest protocol code: 400.
			^ aRequest sendResponse: res content: e messageText
		].
	].

	method caseOf: {
		['GET'] -> [ | accept |
			accept := aRequest headerAt: 'Accept'.
			(accept includesSubString: 'application/json') ifTrue: [
 				^self getDogsAsJson: aRequest].
 			(accept includesSubString: 'text/html') ifTrue: [
 				^self getDogsAsHtml: aRequest]].
		['POST'] -> [self createDog: aRequest].
 		['DELETE'] -> [self deleteDog: aRequest id: id value].
		['PUT'] -> [self updateDog: aRequest id: id value]
 	}

updateDog: aRequest id: id
	| dog |
	
	"Verify that a dog with the given id exists."
	dogDict at: id ifAbsent: [
		^ aRequest send404Response
	].

	"Get Dog object from request body."
	dog := Dog fromJson: aRequest stream.
	dog logAs: 'dog'.
	
	"Update its id to match id parameter."
	dog id: id.
	
	"Save the change."
	dogDict at: dog id put: dog.
	
	"Return the updated dog as JSON."
	^ aRequest send200Response: (Json render: dog) contentType: 'application/json; charset=utf-8'
@end smallexample

To start this server, open a Workspace, enter the following,
select all the lines, and "Do it":

@smallexample
server := MyWebServer new.
server start.
@end smallexample

To stop the server, enter `server stop` and "Do it".
